docs/0-module/1_local_setup.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Local Machine Setup

For this course, you will need a Mac or Ubuntu (GNU/Linux) machine.

:::note

If you are using Windows, you can run Ubuntu inside Windows thanks to [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install).

You can install `WSL` by running the following command in a `Windows PowerShell` terminal:

```zsh
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

:::

## Package Manager

First, let's get a package manager to help install the software that will be needed.

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

macOS doesn't come with a package manager by default, so we will install
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

Open a terminal and run the following command:

```bash
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Once Homebrew is installed, you can install software by running:

```bash
brew install <package-name>
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

Ubuntu comes with a package manager called `apt`. To install software, run the following command in a terminal:

```bash
sudo apt install <package-name>
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Shell

A shell is a program that takes commands from the keyboard and gives them to the
operating system to perform. In the old days, it was the only user interface
available on a Unix-like system such as Linux. Nowadays, we have graphical user
interfaces (GUIs) in addition to command line interfaces (CLIs) such as the
shell.

To open a shell, you can use the following keyboard shortcut:

- **Mac**: `Cmd + Space` and type `Terminal`
- **Linux**: `Ctrl + Alt + T`

### BASH

`bash` is a Unix shell and command language written by Brian Fox for the GNU
Project as a free software replacement for the Bourne shell. First released in
1989, it has been used widely as the default login shell for most Linux
distributions and Apple's macOS Mojave and earlier versions.

We will not go into the details of `bash` here, but you can find more
information on the [Wikipedia page](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)>).

While we will not be using `bash` as our default shell, it is still a good idea
to know how to use it.
Furthermore, many of the commands we will be using in this course are written
for `bash`.

### ZSH

`zsh` is a Unix shell that can be used as an interactive login shell and as a
command interpreter for shell scripting. Zsh is an extended Bourne shell with a
large number of improvements, including some features of Bash, ksh, and tcsh.

We will be using `zsh` as our default shell in this course.

#### Install

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install zsh
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install zsh
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Set as default shell

Set `zsh` as default shell:

```bash
chsh -s $(which zsh)
```

#### Oh-My-Zsh

[Oh-My-Zsh](https://ohmyz.sh/) is an open source, community-driven framework
for managing your zsh configuration (and it comes with a bunch of plugins and
themes).

##### Install

```bash
sh -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/master/tools/install.sh)"
```

#### `.zshrc`

The `.zshrc` file is a script that is executed each time a new `zsh` shell is
started. It is located in your home directory (`~/.zshrc`).

You can edit the `.zshrc` file with your favorite text editor.

We will be adding some configuration to the `.zshrc` file in the next sections.


## Git

Git is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to
handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency.

A version control system (VCS) allows you to track the history of a collection
of files. It supports creating different versions of this collection. Each
version captures a snapshot of the files at a certain point in time and the
VCS allows you to switch between these versions.

Check out the [Git documentation](https://git-scm.com/doc) for more information.

To check if you have Git installed, open a shell and run the following command:

```bash
git --version
```

:::note

If you don't have Git installed, you can install it with your package manager

:::


## Visual Studio Code

[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is a free source-code
editor made by Microsoft for Windows, Linux and macOS. Features include support
for debugging, syntax highlighting, intelligent code completion, snippets, code
refactoring, and embedded Git.

We will be using Visual Studio Code as our
code editor.

To install it, run:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install --cask visual-studio-code
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install code
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

It is a good idea to install the following extensions for Visual Studio Code.
These extensions will make your life easier when working on the assignments.

### Extensions

Open Visual Studio Code and click on the **Extensions** icon in the sidebar.

#### [Live Share](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=MS-vsliveshare.vsliveshare)

This extension allows you to share your code with others and collaborate in real
time.

#### [Remote Dev](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack)

This extension allows you to develop inside a container, on a remote machine, or
in the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).

#### [Python](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.python)

This extension adds support for Python to Visual Studio Code.

#### [Jupyter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter)

This extension adds support for Jupyter notebooks to Visual Studio Code.

## Python

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is an interpreted, high-level and general-purpose programming language.
Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability with its notable use of
significant indentation.
Python is a popular programming language that is used for many different things: from web development to data science.

We will be using it as the main programming language.

Python 3 is the latest version of Python.
It should be installed by default on macOS and Ubuntu.

To check if you have Python 3 installed, run:

```bash
python3 --version
```

### Pip

[Pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) is the package manager for Python.

To check if you have Pip installed, run:

```bash
pip3 --version
```

If you don't have Pip installed, you can install it by running:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install pip
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install python3-pip
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Virtual Environments

To avoid conflicts between different Python projects, it is a good idea to use
virtual environments. A virtual environment is a directory tree which contains
Python executable files and other files which indicate that it is a virtual
environment.

#### Install

Let's install the `virtualenv` package and `virtualenvwrapper` extension for
Python.

```bash
pip3 install --user virtualenv virtualenvwrapper --break-system-packages
```

#### `.zshrc`

We will be adding some configuration to the `.zshrc` file.

Open the `.zshrc` file with your favorite text editor and add the following
lines:

```bash
# Python
export WORKON_HOME=$HOME/.virtualenvs
export VIRTUALENVWRAPPER_PYTHON=/usr/bin/python3
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin
source virtualenvwrapper.sh
```

### Jupyter

[Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyter.org/) is an open-source web application that
allows you to create and share documents that contain live code, equations,
visualizations and narrative text.

We will be using Jupyter Notebook to write some assignments.

#### Install

```bash
pip3 install jupyter --break-system-packages
```

## QGroundControl Installation and Setup

QGroundControl (QGC) is ground control station software that serves as the graphical user interface to view the camera and control the ROV.

### Install Links

:::note
Download the latest recommended version from the link below based on your operating system and install it on your computer.
:::

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

- [QGroundControl for macOS](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl.dmg)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

- [QGroundControl for Linux](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl.AppImage)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

- [QGroundControl for Windows](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl-installer.exe)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Network Setup

When you are done with the installation process, follow the following steps below based on your operating system:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

1. Go to **System Preferences** > **Network**
2. Select **USB 10/100 LAN**
3. Set **Configure IPv4** to **Manually**
4. Set:
   - IP Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Subnet Mask: `255.255.255.0`
   ![macOS Network Settings](mac-network-settings-annotated.png)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

1. Click the Network icon > **Edit Connections...**
   ![Linux 1](LinuxStep1.png)

2. Click **Add**
   ![Linux 2](LinuxStep2.png)

3. Select **Ethernet** and click **Create...**
   ![Linux 3](LinuxStep3.png)

4. Choose your Ethernet adapter from **Device MAC Address**
   ![Linux 4](LinuxStep4.png)

5. Go to **IPv4 Settings**, set method to **Manual**, and enter:
   - Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Netmask: `255.255.255.0`
   - Gateway: `0.0.0.0`
   Click **Save...**
   ![Linux 5](LinuxStep5.png)

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

1. Go to the Windows **Control Panel** > **Network and Sharing Center**. If not visible, set *View by* to large or small icons.
   ![Step 1](brov2-windows-network-setup-1.png)

2. Select **Change adapter settings**.
   ![Step 2](brov2-windows-network-setup-2.png)

3. Find the **Realtek USB FE Family Controller**, right-click and choose **Properties**.
   ![Step 3](brov2-windows-network-setup-3.png)

4. Select **Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4)** and click **Properties**.
   ![Step 4](brov2-windows-network-setup-4.png)

5. Use the following settings:
   - IP Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Subnet Mask: `255.255.255.0`
   ![Step 5](brov2-windows-network-setup-5.png)

#### Firewall Settings

1. Go to **Control Panel** > **Windows Defender Firewall**.
   ![Firewall 1](brov2-firewall-setup-1.png)

2. Click **Allow an app or feature through Windows Defender Firewall**.
   ![Firewall 2](brov2-firewall-setup-2.png)

3. Click **Change Settings**, find **QGroundControl** and allow it for **Private** and **Public**.
   ![Firewall 3](brov2-firewall-setup-3.png)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Connecting to QGroundControl

1. With the BlueROV2 still connected and powered on, start the QGroundControl application.
2. Wait a few seconds for the ROV to auto-connect and for the green parameters bar to finish loading from left to right.

:::note

If this is the first time setting up the ROV, you will receive a message that additional setup is required.

:::

Commit message:

Camera Callibration edits (#33)
* fixed the cheakerboard square size

* Merge branch 'blksail-edu:main' into main

* edited based on notes from class

* Windows VS Code download link

docs/0-module/1_local_setup.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

# Local Machine Setup

For this course, you will need a Mac or Ubuntu (GNU/Linux) machine.

:::note

If you are using Windows, you can run Ubuntu inside Windows thanks to [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install).

You can install `WSL` by running the following command in a `Windows PowerShell` terminal:

```zsh
wsl --install -d Ubuntu-24.04
```

:::

## Package Manager

First, let's get a package manager to help install the software that will be needed.

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

macOS doesn't come with a package manager by default, so we will install
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

Open a terminal and run the following command:

```bash
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Once Homebrew is installed, you can install software by running:

```bash
brew install <package-name>
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

Ubuntu comes with a package manager called `apt`. To install software, run the following command in a terminal:

```bash
sudo apt install <package-name>
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Shell

A shell is a program that takes commands from the keyboard and gives them to the
operating system to perform. In the old days, it was the only user interface
available on a Unix-like system such as Linux. Nowadays, we have graphical user
interfaces (GUIs) in addition to command line interfaces (CLIs) such as the
shell.

To open a shell, you can use the following keyboard shortcut:

- **Mac**: `Cmd + Space` and type `Terminal`
- **Linux**: `Ctrl + Alt + T`

### BASH

`bash` is a Unix shell and command language written by Brian Fox for the GNU
Project as a free software replacement for the Bourne shell. First released in
1989, it has been used widely as the default login shell for most Linux
distributions and Apple's macOS Mojave and earlier versions.

We will not go into the details of `bash` here, but you can find more
information on the [Wikipedia page](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)>).

While we will not be using `bash` as our default shell, it is still a good idea
to know how to use it.
Furthermore, many of the commands we will be using in this course are written
for `bash`.

### ZSH

`zsh` is a Unix shell that can be used as an interactive login shell and as a
command interpreter for shell scripting. Zsh is an extended Bourne shell with a
large number of improvements, including some features of Bash, ksh, and tcsh.

We will be using `zsh` as our default shell in this course.

#### Install

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install zsh
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install zsh
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Set as default shell

Set `zsh` as default shell:

```bash
chsh -s $(which zsh)
```

#### Oh-My-Zsh

[Oh-My-Zsh](https://ohmyz.sh/) is an open source, community-driven framework
for managing your zsh configuration (and it comes with a bunch of plugins and
themes).

##### Install

```bash
sh -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ohmyzsh/ohmyzsh/master/tools/install.sh)"
```

#### `.zshrc`

The `.zshrc` file is a script that is executed each time a new `zsh` shell is
started. It is located in your home directory (`~/.zshrc`).

You can edit the `.zshrc` file with your favorite text editor.

We will be adding some configuration to the `.zshrc` file in the next sections.


## Git

Git is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to
handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency.

A version control system (VCS) allows you to track the history of a collection
of files. It supports creating different versions of this collection. Each
version captures a snapshot of the files at a certain point in time and the
VCS allows you to switch between these versions.

Check out the [Git documentation](https://git-scm.com/doc) for more information.

To check if you have Git installed, open a shell and run the following command:

```bash
git --version
```

:::note

If you don't have Git installed, you can install it with your package manager

:::


## Visual Studio Code

[Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is a free source-code
editor made by Microsoft for Windows, Linux and macOS. Features include support
for debugging, syntax highlighting, intelligent code completion, snippets, code
refactoring, and embedded Git.

We will be using Visual Studio Code as our
code editor.

To install it, run:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install --cask visual-studio-code
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install code
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

Donwnload Visual Studio Code using the following link [**Visual Studio Code**](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

It is a good idea to install the following extensions for Visual Studio Code.
These extensions will make your life easier when working on the assignments.

### Extensions

Open Visual Studio Code and click on the **Extensions** icon in the sidebar.

#### [Live Share](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=MS-vsliveshare.vsliveshare)

This extension allows you to share your code with others and collaborate in real
time.

#### [Remote Dev](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack)

This extension allows you to develop inside a container, on a remote machine, or
in the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).

#### [Python](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.python)

This extension adds support for Python to Visual Studio Code.

#### [Jupyter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter)

This extension adds support for Jupyter notebooks to Visual Studio Code.

## Python

[Python](https://www.python.org/) is an interpreted, high-level and general-purpose programming language.
Python's design philosophy emphasizes code readability with its notable use of
significant indentation.
Python is a popular programming language that is used for many different things: from web development to data science.

We will be using it as the main programming language.

Python 3 is the latest version of Python.
It should be installed by default on macOS and Ubuntu.

To check if you have Python 3 installed, run:

```bash
python3 --version
```

### Pip

[Pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) is the package manager for Python.

To check if you have Pip installed, run:

```bash
pip3 --version
```

If you don't have Pip installed, you can install it by running:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

```bash
brew install pip
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

```bash
sudo apt install python3-pip
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Virtual Environments

To avoid conflicts between different Python projects, it is a good idea to use
virtual environments. A virtual environment is a directory tree which contains
Python executable files and other files which indicate that it is a virtual
environment.

#### Install

Let's install the `virtualenv` package and `virtualenvwrapper` extension for
Python.

```bash
pip3 install --user virtualenv virtualenvwrapper --break-system-packages
```

#### `.zshrc`

We will be adding some configuration to the `.zshrc` file.

Open the `.zshrc` file with your favorite text editor and add the following
lines:

```bash
# Python
export WORKON_HOME=$HOME/.virtualenvs
export VIRTUALENVWRAPPER_PYTHON=/usr/bin/python3
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/.local/bin
source virtualenvwrapper.sh
```

### Jupyter

[Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyter.org/) is an open-source web application that
allows you to create and share documents that contain live code, equations,
visualizations and narrative text.

We will be using Jupyter Notebook to write some assignments.

#### Install

```bash
pip3 install jupyter --break-system-packages
```

## QGroundControl Installation and Setup

QGroundControl (QGC) is ground control station software that serves as the graphical user interface to view the camera and control the ROV.

### Install Links

:::note
Download the latest recommended version from the link below based on your operating system and install it on your computer.
:::

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

- [QGroundControl for macOS](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl.dmg)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

- [QGroundControl for Linux](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl.AppImage)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

- [QGroundControl for Windows](https://s3.amazonaws.com/downloads.bluerobotics.com/QGC/latest/QGroundControl-installer.exe)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Network Setup

When you are done with the installation process, follow the following steps below based on your operating system:

<Tabs groupId="operating-systems">
<TabItem value="macos" label="macOS">

1. Go to **System Preferences** > **Network**
2. Select **USB 10/100 LAN**
3. Set **Configure IPv4** to **Manually**
4. Set:
   - IP Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Subnet Mask: `255.255.255.0`
   ![macOS Network Settings](mac-network-settings-annotated.png)

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="ubuntu" label="Ubuntu">

1. Click the Network icon > **Edit Connections...**
   ![Linux 1](LinuxStep1.png)

2. Click **Add**
   ![Linux 2](LinuxStep2.png)

3. Select **Ethernet** and click **Create...**
   ![Linux 3](LinuxStep3.png)

4. Choose your Ethernet adapter from **Device MAC Address**
   ![Linux 4](LinuxStep4.png)

5. Go to **IPv4 Settings**, set method to **Manual**, and enter:
   - Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Netmask: `255.255.255.0`
   - Gateway: `0.0.0.0`
   Click **Save...**
   ![Linux 5](LinuxStep5.png)

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">

1. Go to the Windows **Control Panel** > **Network and Sharing Center**. If not visible, set *View by* to large or small icons.
   ![Step 1](brov2-windows-network-setup-1.png)

2. Select **Change adapter settings**.
   ![Step 2](brov2-windows-network-setup-2.png)

3. Find the **Realtek USB FE Family Controller**, right-click and choose **Properties**.
   ![Step 3](brov2-windows-network-setup-3.png)

4. Select **Internet Protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4)** and click **Properties**.
   ![Step 4](brov2-windows-network-setup-4.png)

5. Use the following settings:
   - IP Address: `192.168.2.1`
   - Subnet Mask: `255.255.255.0`
   ![Step 5](brov2-windows-network-setup-5.png)

#### Firewall Settings

:::warning
Make sure that you have already **installed** and **launched** QGroundControl before trying to do the next steps
:::

1. Go to **Control Panel** > **Windows Defender Firewall**.
   ![Firewall 1](brov2-firewall-setup-1.png)

2. Click **Allow an app or feature through Windows Defender Firewall**.
   ![Firewall 2](brov2-firewall-setup-2.png)

3. Click **Change Settings**, find **QGroundControl** and allow it for **Private** and **Public**.
   ![Firewall 3](brov2-firewall-setup-3.png)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Connecting to QGroundControl

1. With the BlueROV2 still connected and powered on, start the QGroundControl application.
2. Wait a few seconds for the ROV to auto-connect and for the green parameters bar to finish loading from left to right.

:::note

If this is the first time setting up the ROV, you will receive a message that additional setup is required.

:::
