docs/2-module/40_ros2_with_ardusub.mdx, before:

---
slidebar_position: 4
---

# 2.3 ArduSub & ROSMAV

In this section, we explore `ArduSub` and `rosmav`.
ArduSub is a fork of ArduPilot, a flight controller software that runs onboard the BlueROV2 through `BueOS`. The ArduSub software utilizes the `MAVLINK` communication protocol to control the motors, receive sensor data, etc.
You will connect to the BlueROV2 through ROS 2 using a custom `rosmav` interface. This interface uses the `MAVLINK` communication protocal inside of a ROS 2 node to talk to the "*frontseat*" onboard the vehicle.

## Installing ArduSub

For the purposes of this problem set and future simulations (with QGroundControl), you must install `ArduSub`.
When you interface with the ROVs themselves, you'll connect to a `SITL` running onboard and therefore you will not need to run your own.

:::note

You must install ArduSub while you are in a virtual environment on the Raspberry Pi!

:::

Open a terminal on the `backseat` and install `ArduSub` from our repository:

```zsh
cd && git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/blksail-edu/ardupilot
cd ~/ardupilot
```

Then, create a new virtual environment for `ArduSub`:

```zsh
mkvirtualenv ardusub
```

Installing the following python libraries into the `ardusub` virtual environment:

```zsh
pip install empy==3.3.4 pexpect mavproxy future dronecan setuptools pyyaml
```

Also install the `ccache` system library and remove the `modemmanager` system library:

```zsh
sudo apt install ccache -y
sudo apt remove modemmanager -y
```

Now, configure the `ArduPilot` repository:

```zsh
./waf configure
. ~/.profile
./waf clean
```

With your favorite text editor, add the following commands to the `.zshrc` file on the `backseat`:

```zsh
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/ardupilot/Tools/autotest
export PATH=/usr/lib/ccache:$PATH
```

Source the `.zshrc` file and reactivate the `ardusub` virtual environment:

```zsh
source ~/.zshrc
workon ardusub
```

Lastly, install the geographic library datasets:

```zsh
cd && wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mavlink/mavros/ros2/mavros/scripts/install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
chmod +x ./install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
sudo ./install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
```

## Testing ArduSub

In a terminal on the `backseat`, you may now start the software in the loop (`SITL`).

:::info
The first time you start the `SITL`, it may take up to 30 minutes to configure.
:::

```zsh
~/ardupilot/Tools/autotest/sim_vehicle.py --vehicle=ArduSub --aircraft="bwsibot" -L RATBeach --out=udp:192.168.3.1:14550
```

## Installing ROSMAV

1. First, create a new virutal environment for the `rosmav` interface.

```zsh
mkvirtualenv rosmav --system-site-packages
workon rosmav
```

2. Install the following libraries in the `rosmav` virtual environment.

```zsh
pip install cv_bridge numpy pymavlink
```

3. Now, clone the `rosmav` repository into the `src` directory of your `auvc_ws`.

```zsh
cd ~/auvc_ws/src && git clone https://github.com/blksail-edu/rosmav
```

4. Install ROS 2 dependencies for `rosmav`:

```zsh
sudo rosdep init
```

```zsh
rosdep update
```

```zsh
cd ~/auvc_ws && rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
```

5. Compile the `rosmav` package and source the workspace.

```zsh
colcon build --packages-select rosmav && source install/setup.zsh
```

## Launching ROSMAV

After building the `rosmav` package, test the interface by running the following command in a terminal on the backseat:

```zsh
ros2 run rosmav ros_bluerov2_interface
```

:::note

Make sure you are running ArduSub! In a new terminal, activate the virtual environment (```workon ardusub```) and run the simulation:
```~/ardupilot/Tools/autotest/sim_vehicle.py --vehicle=ArduSub --aircraft="bwsibot" -L RATBeach --out=udp:192.168.3.1:14550```

:::

If the command runs successfully, you should see the following output:

```zsh
[INFO] [1721669754.194733875] [ros_bluerov2_interface]: Heartbeat from system 1, component 0
```


## Problem Set

For this problem set, please first create a new ROS 2 package named `tutorial_ardusub` to contain any new nodes that you create.

### Problem One

In your `tutorial_ardusub` package, create a new node called `bluerov2_sensors.py`. This node should do the following:

1. Subscribe to the battery sensor messages.
2. Subscribe to the inertial measurement unit \(IMU\) sensor messages.
3. Use attributes that are updated on subscription callbacks.
4. Output a warning in the terminal when the battery has fallen below a safe voltage.

:::info

When both `ArduSub` and `ROSMAV` are running on the `backseat`, the `SITL` will send simulated messages that you can use to test your node.

:::

### Problem Two

Open `QGroundControl` on your Windows or macOs machine. You should see the BlueROV2 somewhere along the United State's west coast. This BlueROV2 is the `SITL` running on the `backseat`.

If it is not already running, start your node from **Problem One**.

In `QGroundControl`, arm the BlueROV2 and change its flight mode to `GUIDED`. Click any arbitrary point in the water and select `Go to location`. 
After holding down your space bar or dragging the slider, you should see the BlueROV2 moving.

Open a new terminal on the `backseat` and use the `ros2 topic echo` command on any of the available topics to inspect the messages being published 
to different topics. Also pay attention to your node. What do you observe?

:::warning Check-off

Review with a TA or instructor to check-off this section.

:::

Commit message:

Implement fixes to (windows wsl) gazebo sim instructions in sensor-driven-autonomy (#31)
* Add gz sim instructions (#2)

* remove instructions for gcc cross compiler

* add mavros-msgs install to rosmav setup instructions

* change mavros launch command for bluerov2 with qgroundcontrol in problem set

* Add ports to properly allow Gazebo msg transport

* add instructions for running the simulating with ros2 bridge, simulation interface

* typo fixes

* idk

* add sudo apt upgrade

* remove ubuntu instructions that were copy/pasted from windows

* fix typos in gz sim instructions

* remove outdated ros2 launch command instructions from gz sim

* add small clarification to what a workspace is

* removes unecessary file

* Fix Typo (#30)

* typo

* make request clearer

* I'm pretty sure we should be showing "color_img" and not the "img" to see the correct greyscale and april tags detected result

* Camera Calibration Instructions (#32)

* Added new section - instructions for Camera Calliberation

* adde the checkerboard

* Reviews + changed the camera topic

docs/2-module/40_ros2_with_ardusub.mdx, after:

---
slidebar_position: 4
---

# 2.3 ArduSub & ROSMAV

In this section, we explore `ArduSub` and `rosmav`.
ArduSub is a fork of ArduPilot, a flight controller software that runs onboard the BlueROV2 through `BueOS`. The ArduSub software utilizes the `MAVLINK` communication protocol to control the motors, receive sensor data, etc.
You will connect to the BlueROV2 through ROS 2 using a custom `rosmav` interface. This interface uses the `MAVLINK` communication protocal inside of a ROS 2 node to talk to the "*frontseat*" onboard the vehicle.

## Installing ArduSub

For the purposes of this problem set and future simulations (with QGroundControl), you must install `ArduSub`.
When you interface with the ROVs themselves, you'll connect to a `SITL` running onboard and therefore you will not need to run your own.

:::note

You must install ArduSub while you are in a virtual environment on the Raspberry Pi!

:::

Open a terminal on the `backseat` and install `ArduSub` from our repository:

```zsh
cd && git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/blksail-edu/ardupilot
cd ~/ardupilot
```

Then, create a new virtual environment for `ArduSub`:

```zsh
mkvirtualenv ardusub
```

Installing the following python libraries into the `ardusub` virtual environment:

```zsh
pip install empy==3.3.4 pexpect mavproxy future dronecan setuptools pyyaml
```

Also install the `ccache` system library and remove the `modemmanager` system library:

```zsh
sudo apt install ccache -y
sudo apt remove modemmanager -y
```

Now, configure the `ArduPilot` repository:

```zsh
./waf configure
. ~/.profile
./waf clean
```

With your favorite text editor, add the following commands to the `.zshrc` file on the `backseat`:

```zsh
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/ardupilot/Tools/autotest
export PATH=/usr/lib/ccache:$PATH
```

Source the `.zshrc` file and reactivate the `ardusub` virtual environment:

```zsh
source ~/.zshrc
workon ardusub
```

Lastly, install the geographic library datasets:

```zsh
cd && wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mavlink/mavros/ros2/mavros/scripts/install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
chmod +x ./install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
sudo ./install_geographiclib_datasets.sh
```

## Testing ArduSub

In a terminal on the `backseat`, you may now start the software in the loop (`SITL`).

:::info
The first time you start the `SITL`, it may take up to 30 minutes to configure.
:::

```zsh
~/ardupilot/Tools/autotest/sim_vehicle.py --vehicle=ArduSub --aircraft="bwsibot" -L RATBeach --out=udp:192.168.3.1:14550
```

## Installing ROSMAV

1. First, create a new virutal environment for the `rosmav` interface.

```zsh
mkvirtualenv rosmav --system-site-packages
workon rosmav
```

2. Install the following libraries in the `rosmav` virtual environment.

```zsh
pip install cv_bridge numpy pymavlink
```

3. Now, clone the `rosmav` repository into the `src` directory of your `auvc_ws`.

```zsh
cd ~/auvc_ws/src && git clone https://github.com/blksail-edu/rosmav
```

4. Install ROS 2 dependencies for `rosmav`:

```zsh
sudo rosdep init
```

```zsh
rosdep update
```

```zsh
cd ~/auvc_ws && rosdep install --from-paths src --ignore-src -r -y
```

```zsh
sudo apt install ros-jazzy-ros-gz-bridge ros-jazzy-mavros-msgs
```

5. Compile the `rosmav` package and source the workspace.

```zsh
colcon build --packages-select rosmav && source install/setup.zsh
```

## Launching ROSMAV

After building the `rosmav` package, test the interface by running the following command in a terminal on the `backseat`:

```zsh
ros2 run rosmav bluerov2_hardware_interface
```

:::note

Make sure you are running ArduSub! In a new terminal, activate the virtual environment (```workon ardusub```) and run the simulation:
```~/ardupilot/Tools/autotest/sim_vehicle.py --vehicle=ArduSub --aircraft="bwsibot" -L RATBeach --out=udp:192.168.3.1:14550```

:::

If the command runs successfully, you should see the following output:

```zsh
[INFO] [1721669754.194733875] [ros_bluerov2_interface]: Heartbeat from system 1, component 0
```


## Problem Set

For this problem set, please first create a new ROS 2 package named `tutorial_ardusub` to contain any new nodes that you create.

### Problem One

In your `tutorial_ardusub` package, create a new node called `bluerov2_sensors.py`. This node should do the following:

1. Subscribe to the battery sensor messages.
2. Subscribe to the inertial measurement unit \(IMU\) sensor messages.
3. Use attributes that are updated on subscription callbacks.
4. Output a warning in the terminal when the battery has fallen below a safe voltage.

:::info

When both `ArduSub` and `ROSMAV` are running on the `backseat`, the `SITL` will send simulated messages that you can use to test your node.

:::

### Problem Two

Open `QGroundControl` on your Windows or macOs machine. You should see the BlueROV2 somewhere along the United State's west coast. This BlueROV2 is the `SITL` running on the `backseat`.

If it is not already running, start your node from **Problem One**.

In `QGroundControl`, arm the BlueROV2 and change its flight mode to `GUIDED`. Click any arbitrary point in the water and select `Go to location`. 
After holding down your space bar or dragging the slider, you should see the BlueROV2 moving.

Open a new terminal on the `backseat` and use the `ros2 topic echo` command on any of the available topics to inspect the messages being published 
to different topics. Also pay attention to your node. What do you observe?

:::warning Check-off

Review with a TA or instructor to check-off this section.

:::
